---
layout: post
title: "Feature Design: Clicking"
date: 2023-01-23
---

There a few features from the previous design post that did not make it
into the pull request. These include:

 * Radius controls for rounded rectangles
 * A toggle for rectangle rounding
 * An option to convert shapes to paths
 * Options to change the segments of polygons and polylines to other
   shapes.

Besides the controls for rounded rectangle, all of these use
element-specific changes to the context menu. Right now, the context menu
options are hard-coded, and only depend on whether or not a Segment was
clicked. This needs to be changed before these options can be added.

The Problem
===========

The `clicked` method on Elements was designed when the only Elements were
Paths. It returns if the path was clicked, and the segment that was clicked
(if any). Currently, the other shapes simply return `null` for the segment,
but this is mostly incorrect for Polylines, Polygons, and possibly Lines. 
The real issue comes when handling right-clicks and bringing up the context
menu. The menu adds items based on if a Segment was clicked and the
Segment's `segment_type`. Among other things, this includes splitting a
segment, which is necessary for making Polylines and Polygons useful.
However, Polylines and Polygons can only have Linear segments, so most of
the existing context menu would be useless. The context menu is also the
best way to change Elements to less restrictive supertypes, but there is
no way to do that with the current setup.

Right now, no new functionality will be added. This will be pure
refactoring as much as possible, with the intent to add functionality in
future features (still part of this release).

Planned menu options: (These will not all be present after this feature)
  * Paths (any segment):
     * Delete Path
     * Split Segment
     * Change Segment Type
     * Reverse path direction (relevant for relative segments)
  * Arc Segments of Paths:
     * Flip Arc
  * Handles:
     * Split Path
  * Handles between two curve segments:
     * Make smooth (toggle)
  * Rectangles:
     * Delete Rectangle
     * Toggle Corner Rounding
  * Non-rounded Rectangles:
     * Convert to Polygon
  * Rounded Rectangles:
     * Convert to Path
  * Circles:
     * Delete Circle
     * Convert to Ellipse
  * Ellipses:
     * Delete Ellipse
     * Convert to Path
  * Polygons:
     * Delete Polygon
     * Split Segment
     * Convert to Path
  * Polylines:
     * Close Polygon
     * Delete Polyline
     * Convert to Path
     * Split Segment
  * Lines:
     * Convert to Polyline

The Solution
============

As always, this is a preliminary design, and it will likely change before
implementation is finished. (This is the second version; the first was much
more complicated and involved a new interface.)

### New Base class Segment

The existing `Segment` class will be split into three classes: `Segment`,
`PathSegment`, and `LineSegment`. `PathSegment` is the same as the current
`Segment` class; `LineSegment` is a version that can only be linear for
Polylines and Polygons, and `Segment` is a base class so both can be used
in the `clicked` handler.

### New Methods

`Segments` and `Elements` will get a new method called `options()`. This
will return the options that should appear in the context menu as a list
of `ContextOption`s.

### New Class `ContextOption`

This is a representation of options for the context menu. Similar to
`PathSegment`, there are multiple constructors for different kinds of
options.

 * constructor `ContextOption.action (string label, ActionCallback callback)`

   This is used for options that perform an action, similar to
   "Delete Path". Options to convert to base path types will use this.

 * constructor `ContextOption.toggle (string label, Undoable obj, string property)`

   This is used for toggleable option, such as "Enable Transform". Rounding
   on rectangles (which I forgot to add earlier) will use this.

 * constructor `ContextOption.options (Undoable obj, string property, List<string, int>)`

   This is used for switchable items, such as the `PathSegment` segment
   type selector. I think that is the only thing that will use this.

 * type `delegate void ActionCallback()`

   This is used for callbacks on options. They should take no arguments and
   return no values; if external variables are needed (which they probably
   will), they must be taken by closure.

 * property `ContextOptionType option_type`

   This holds the type of the option so the menu builder can tell how to
   load it.

 * property `string label`

   For options that result in a single row (actions and toggles), this
   holds the text of the label.

 * property `Undoable target`
 * property `string prop`

   For options that apply to an object's property, these properties store
   the object and property associated with it.

 * property `Gee.Map<string, int> toggle_options`

   For toggle options, this stores the labels and values that can be
   switched between.

 * property `ActionCallback callback`

   This holds the function to call when an Action option is selected.

### New Enum `ContextOptionType`

Similar to the SegmentType enum, this determines what kind of option
this is. Each kind has its own constructor, specified above.

 * `ACTION`

   This is for options that call a function when selected, like
   "Delete Path" or "Split Segment". This uses the `callback` property.

 * `PROPERTY_TOGGLE`

   This is for toggled properties, like "Enable Transform". This uses
   the `source_object` and `source_property` properties.

 * `PROPERTY_OPTION`

   This is for properties with multiple options, such as the Segment
   Type selection. This uses the `source_object`, `source_property`, and
   `toggle_options` properties.

### Changes to click handling

When a right click is detected, the menu will call `options` on both the
segment (if present) and element, then parse the results into options to
put in the menu. Toggle options will be set to match the current state of
the associated property, and Options items will select the currently
selected option.

