---
title: Roadmap to 0.3
date: 25-06-13
layout: post
---

I have decided to merge the error reporting branch. (It only took 11 months.) With that, all major
features for **Froggum 0.3** are complete. Everything else will be minor tweaks, some missing
functionality, and bugfixes, getting it into a state that other people can use it.

Changes I intend to make are:

1. Implement loading the rest of the path commands.

   These came up in one of my test files, and not being able to load them is annoying. Saving them
   is not a priority. Remaining commands are:
   * Horizontal lines
   * Vertical lines
   * Quadratic curves
   * Smooth cubic curves
   * Smooth quadratic curves
   * Repeated commands of the same type

   Besides quadratic curves, all of these are simply shorthands for path segments **Froggum**
   already supports, which only requires a bit of loading work. Implementing quadratic curves
   will be more complicated, but will still fit into the existing frameworks, and is not too
   complicated for this stage. I will not be implementing disconnected paths at this time.

2. Fix the scrollbars

   I fought with the scrollbars a lot in previous bugfixes. I now declare the intended
   functionality: scrollbars should allow scrolling on either side to the point that the edge of
   the grid is on the edge of the screen, with the image entirely off-screen. Panning the viewport
   manually allows going beyond those limits, and the scrollbars will adjust to allow scrolling to
   that new point. After scrolling back towards the image, the scrollbars will adjust to the
   smallest range including the default limits and the current position. This adjustment will only
   happen when the scrolling stops.

   I think most of this is already working, but the limit is the grid at the center of the screen,
   which looks weird.

3. Layout tweaks

   Some things need more space around them, others just look weird. I will also check that every
   button has a tooltip, and that any user-facing string (except the detailed error message) is
   translated.

4. Portuguese translation

   To ensure that everything is translated, and to figure out how translation works, I will
   translate everything into Portuguese. Other languages may follow, but not in this release.

5. Add Bobby to the tutorial

6. Update the **Froggum** icons

   This will give me a chance to look for bugs while doing something productive.

7. Fix more bugs

   I'm sure that in the process of doing the above implementations, I will encounter bugs. Those
   bugs should be fixed. Any bugs that I don't find from doing this work will be left to beta
   testers.

8. Write documentation

   Ideally, **Froggum** should be usable without a manual. It needs one anyway, if only to explain
   how installation works and that you have to right-click on paths to do things with them.

   Expect a blog post defining what all I need to document.

9. Beta testing art contest

   Since the best way I've found to find bugs in **Froggum** is to use it for its intended purpose,
   my strategy for beta testing will be to ask people to make something cool with it and share
   their creations in a Github Issue, while reporting all of the bugs they find along the way. My
   favorite submissions will be posted in this blog, where the people that submitted art can look
   at them.

10. Figure out how the elementary OS app submission process works

    This has changed since the last time I tried submitting **Froggum**.

That's it. Ten simple steps. If I don't run into more issues where I can't tell if something is
done yet (as happened with the Gtk 4 port and error reporting), this could be done by the end of
the month.
